---
title: 1. The More Things Change, the More They Stay the Same
date: 2020-09-15
---

# Atom

``` cicada
check! "ratatouille": String

"ratatouille"
```

# Definition of Judgment

> A judgment is an attitude that a person takes towards expressions.
> When we come to know something, we are making a judgment.

Thus, about a judgment, we can say:

- we have reason to believe `____`.
- we have no reason to believe `____`.

# Definition of "Form of judgment"

> A form of judgment is an observation
> with blank spaces in it, such as
>
> `____ is a ____.`

# Pair

``` cicada
check! cons("ratatouille", "baguette"): Pair(String, String)
check! refl: Equal(String, "ratatouille", "ratatouille")

check! refl: Equal(
  Pair(String, String),
  cons("ratatouille", "baguette"),
  cons("ratatouille", "baguette")
)

check! car(the(Pair(String, String), cons("ratatouille", "baguette"))): String

check! refl: Equal(
  String,
  "ratatouille",
  car(the(Pair(String, String), cons("ratatouille", "baguette")))
)
```

# Definition of Type

Expressions that describe other expressions are called types.

- Xie: When we can say "x is P", that means "P" describe "x".

This definition of type is very simple,
with a leading question, it is even more natural.

# Type

``` cicada

check! Pair(String, String): Type
check! String: Type
check! Type: Type
check! refl: Equal(Type, String, String)

check! Pair(
  car(the(Pair(Type, String), cons(String, "olive"))),
  cdr(the(Pair(String, Type), cons("oil", String)))
): Type

check! cons(
  cdr(the(Pair(Type, String), cons(String, "olive"))),
  car(the(Pair(String, Type), cons("oil", String)))
): Pair(
  car(the(Pair(Type, String), cons(String, "olive"))),
  cdr(the(Pair(String, Type), cons("oil", String)))
)
```

# The Four Forms of Judgment

```
(1)                   ____ is a ____.
(2)    ____ is the same ____ as ____.
(3)                   ____ is a type.
(4)  ____ and ____ are the same type.
```

Judgments are acts of knowing, and believing is part of knowing.

Judgments are sentences.

But, Sentences get their meaning from those who understand them.
The sentences capture thoughts that we have,
and thoughts are more important than the words we use to express them.

# Definition of Normal Forms

Expressions that are written differently
may nevertheless be the same,
as seen in frames 39-41.
One way of writing these expressions
is more direct than the others.

The normal form of an expression is the most direct way of writing it.

Any two expressions that are the same have identical normal forms,
and any two expressions with identical normal forms are the same.

> **Normal Forms**
>
> Given a type,
> every expression described by that type has a normal form,
> which is the most direct way of writing it.
>
> If two expressions are the same,
> then they have identical normal forms,
> and if they have identical normal forms,
> then they are the same.

> **Normal Forms and Types**
>
> Sameness is always according to a type, so normal forms
> are also determined by a type.

There might be the case where,
given `x: A` and `x: B`,
the normal form of `x` under `A`,
is different from the normal form of `x` under `B`.

> Each type can specify its own notion of equality,
> and thus the syntax of its normal forms.
>
> -- "NbE Tutorial", David.

# Value, Neutral & Normal

当 `Neutral` 想要递归引用到 `Value` 时，
应该通过带有类型的 `Value`，即 `Normal` 来引用，
因为 `Value.readback` 必须是带有类型的 readback，
其类型不应是 `(ctx: Ctx, value: Value) => Exp`，
而应该是 `(ctx: Ctx, t: Ty, value: Value) => Exp`。

# Definition of Value

An expression with a constructor at the top is called a value.

这种对 Value 的定义，好像很适合 lazy language。
也就是说 Dan 的理解，可能比 David 的实现要深刻一些。

# Definition of Neutral

Expressions that are not values
and cannot yet be evaluated due to a variable
are called neutral.

这个定义是出现在下一章的，
我先写在这里做对比。

# Definition of constructor

Some expressions, such as Nat or (Pair Nat Atom), are types.

Part of explaining a new type
is to say what its constructors are.
The constructor expressions are the direct ways
of building expressions with the new type.

# Value, Neutral & Normal as predicates or subsets of Exp

注意，当定义这些术语时，Dan 是通过给 Exp 的集合分类来作出定义的。

首先定义的是 Normal。
"The normal form of an expression is the most direct way of writing it."
与实现中不同，定义用的不是 "带有 Type 的 Value"。
- 而且在实现中用到了 NotYetValue，它其实是 Neutral，但是实现中它被嵌入在了 Value 里。

其次是 Value。
"An expression with a constructor at the top is called a value."
现在我们有：Normal <: Value <: Exp
- Normal <: Value 是错误的
然后我们可以定义：Neutral = Exp - Value
或者说：Neutral = Non Value
并且有：Neutral + Value = Exp

最后是 Neutral。
"Expressions that are not values
and cannot yet be evaluated due to a variable
are called neutral."
也就是说，上面的 Neutral + Value = Exp 是错误的，
要加上 "尝试 evaluate，但因 var 而失败" 才正确。

# Definition of evaluation

Finding a value that is the same as
some starting expression is called evaluation.

What about the type? Sameness, after all, requires types.

From time to time, when talking about sameness,
we do not explicitly mention a type.
Nevertheless, a type is always intended,
and can be discovered by reading carefully.

Doesn't evaluation refer to
finding the meaning of an expression,
not just some simpler expression?

Not here. Expressions do not refer to some external notion of meaning
-- in Pie, there is nothing but expressions
and what we judge about them.

- In Lisp, values are distinct from expressions,
  and the result of evaluation is a value.

Everything Is an Expression

In Pie, values are also expressions.
Evaluation in Pie finds an expression,
not some other kind of thing.

A normal expression has no remaining opportunities for evaluation.
Usually, expressions that are normal are easier to understand.
Finding a value is often enough, however,
because the top constructor can be used to determine what must happen next.
